.TH JARVIS 1 "March 2026" "0.4.0" "Jarvis User Manual"
.SH NAME
jarvis \- Local-First AI Orchestrator with NixOS/Generic-Linux Service Management, ERS, and CBAC Security
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jarvis
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.br
.B jarvis
\'\fINATURAL LANGUAGE PROMPT\fR\'
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B jarvis
is a heavy-duty local-first AI orchestrator.
It implements a \fBCapability-Based Access Control (CBAC)\fR security model (Trust Levels 0\-4) and an \fBExternal Reasoning System (ERS)\fR for multi-step tasks.
Service management is fully cross-platform: on NixOS services are declared in \fImodules/jarvis.nix\fR and managed declaratively; on traditional Linux, systemd user services are installed from portable templates via \fBmake install-services\fR.
.SH KEY ARCHITECTURAL COMPONENTS
.TP
.B Security Manager
Enforces trust ceilings, handles interactive and OOB capability approvals, and audits all sensitive operations.
.TP
.B ERS (External Reasoning System)
Executes complex workloads via YAML-defined chains. Each step runs in an isolated child security context with auto-revocation of temporary grants.
.TP
.B Model Hub
Unified router for local (Ollama) and cloud models. Supports persistent and session-scoped overrides via \fBjarvis models select\fR.
.TP
.B Antigravity IDE Layer
Custom LSP bridge for Neovim providing asynchronous code actions with session-level isolation. Manage models directly from Neovim with \fB<leader>jm\fR.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Print version information.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show a help summary.
.TP
.B \-\-short
Emit condensed one-line output for commands that support it (e.g., \fBstatus\fR).
.SH SERVICE LIFECYCLE COMMANDS
.TP
.B start [\fIALIAS\fR]
Start background services. With no argument, starts all services enabled in \fIuser_prefs.toml\fR, falling back to health+git. Pass a service alias to start a specific one.
.br
Aliases: \fBhealth\fR, \fBgit\fR, \fBcoding\fR, \fBhealer\fR, \fBlsp\fR, \fBvoice\fR, \fBdaily\fR, \fBcontext\fR, \fBindexer\fR
.TP
.B stop [\fIALIAS\fR]
Stop background services (all or a specific alias).
.TP
.B restart [\fIALIAS\fR]
Restart background services (all or a specific alias). Equivalent to stop then start.
.TP
.B pause
Suspend AI inference by sending SIGSTOP to all Ollama processes. Frees CPU for other tasks.
.TP
.B resume
Resume inference by sending SIGCONT to paused Ollama processes.
.TP
.B status [\-\-short]
Display health of all background services, Ollama load, budget, and session authentication.
.TP
.B uptime [\fIALIAS\fR]
Show how long each service has been running. Optionally filter to one service by alias.
.TP
.B dashboard
Launch the Rust TUI live monitor (\fBjarvis-monitor\fR binary in \fIbin/\fR).
.TP
.B indexer
Control the background knowledge indexer service (watches filesystem for changes and updates FAISS index).
.SH SERVICE MANAGEMENT COMMANDS
.TP
.B service enable \fIALIAS\fR
Mark a service alias for auto-start when running \fBjarvis start\fR without arguments. Persisted to \fIuser_prefs.toml\fR.
.TP
.B service disable \fIALIAS\fR
Remove a service alias from the auto-start list.
.TP
.B service config \fIALIAS\fR \fIKEY\fR [\fIVAL\fR]
Read or write a systemd service property. Supported properties: \fBRestartSec\fR, \fBNice\fR, \fBMemoryMax\fR, \fBCPUQuota\fR.
.br
On \fBNixOS\fR this prints the equivalent \fIjarvis.nix\fR stanza and exits \(em unit files are read-only and managed by Nix.
.br
On \fBtraditional Linux\fR a drop-in override file is written to \fI~/.config/systemd/user/<unit>.service.d/jarvis-override.conf\fR and the daemon is reloaded.
.TP
.B install_services [\-\-enable] [\-\-uninstall]
Install portable systemd user service and timer files from \fIservices/templates/\fR. Paths and UIDs are substituted automatically.
.br
On \fBNixOS\fR this is a no-op: it prints guidance to edit \fImodules/jarvis.nix\fR and run \fCsudo nixos-rebuild switch\fR.
.br
Equivalent Makefile targets: \fCmake install-services\fR, \fCmake install-services-enable\fR, \fCmake uninstall-services\fR.
.SH AI MODEL COMMANDS
.TP
.B models list
List all registered local (Ollama) and cloud models with their current routing assignments.
.TP
.B models active
Show the currently effective model for each role (default, coding, research, fast, thinking). Session overrides are highlighted.
.TP
.B models select [\-\-session] \fIROLE\fR \fIMODEL\fR
Set the active model for a role. Roles: \fBdefault\fR, \fBcoding\fR, \fBresearch\fR, \fBfast\fR, \fBthinking\fR.
Without \fB\-\-session\fR the change is written to \fIuser_prefs.toml\fR (persistent). With \fB\-\-session\fR the override lasts only until the next shell.
.SH KNOWLEDGE & RAG COMMANDS
.TP
.B index [\-\-category \fINAME\fR] [\-\-privacy \fI0\-3\fR] [\fIDIR\fR]
Index the current (or given) codebase for the coding agent. Privacy levels: 0=local-only, 1=internal, 2=standard, 3=cloud-allowed.
.TP
.B ingest \fIURL/FILE\fR [\-\-layer \fI1\-3\fR] [\-\-category \fINAME\fR]
Immediately index a document into the RAG knowledge base.
.TP
.B learn \fI[TOPIC | URL/FILE]\fR [\-\-layer \fI1\-3\fR] [\-\-category \fINAME\fR]
Assisted learning (no URL: interactive mode) or direct ingestion with metadata.
.TP
.B query "\fIQUESTION\fR" [\-\-category \fINAME\fR]
Perform a RAG search against Vault databases. Associations from the current directory are applied automatically.
.TP
.B associate [\fICATEGORY\fR | list | remove \fICATEGORY\fR]
Link the current working directory to a knowledge category. Enables context-aware RAG when running \fBquery\fR or \fBingest\fR from a codebase.
.TP
.B inbox [list | process \fIID\fR]
Manage the document inbox queue. \fBlist\fR shows pending items; \fBprocess \fIID\fR\fR ingests the document into an isolated category.
.TP
.B knowledge
Query or inspect the knowledge graph.
.TP
.B codebases
List all registered codebase entries.
.TP
.B forget \fIID\fR
Remove an item from the knowledge base by ID.
.SH CONFIGURATION COMMANDS
.TP
.B config set \fIKEY\fR \fIVAL\fR [\-\-session]
Set a preference. Without \fB\-\-session\fR writes to \fI~/.config/jarvis/user_prefs.toml\fR (permanent). With \fB\-\-session\fR the change overrides only in \fI~/.config/jarvis/context/session_prefs.json\fR and is not persisted.
.TP
.B config get \fIKEY\fR
Read a preference value.
.TP
.B config list
Print all persistent preferences and, if present, all current session overrides.
.TP
.B config reset
Restore all persistent preferences to factory defaults. Session overrides are left untouched.
.TP
.B config nvim
Open the Neovim configuration in the editor.
.TP
.B config nixos
Open \fIconfiguration.nix\fR in the editor.
.TP
.B set-key \fIPROVIDER\fR \fIKEY\fR
Encrypt and store an API key in the Vault. Supported providers: \fBanthropic\fR, \fBopenai\fR, \fBgoogle\fR, \fBdeepseek\fR, \fBgroq\fR, \fBopenrouter\fR, \fBcerebras\fR.
.TP
.B keys
List all configured API keys and verify they are non-empty.
.SH SECURITY & CAPABILITY COMMANDS
.TP
.B cap list
List all capability grants for the current context.
.TP
.B cap grant \fICAP\fR
Grant a capability (e.g., \fCfile_read\fR, \fCshell_exec\fR).
.TP
.B cap revoke \fICAP\fR
Revoke a previously granted capability.
.TP
.B approve \fIID\fR
Approve a pending OOB capability request.
.TP
.B deny \fIID\fR
Reject a pending OOB capability request.
.TP
.B pending
List all active out-of-band (OOB) capability requests.
.SH MISC COMMANDS
.TP
.B sessions [\fIID\fR]
List recent interaction sessions or dump a specific session.
.TP
.B training
Run Jarvis learning and training pipelines.
.TP
.B backup
Create a backup of the Jarvis codebase to the Vault.
.TP
.B archive
Create a compressed archive of the codebase for long-term storage.
.TP
.B thumbs-up / thumbs-down
Rate the last AI response. Rating is appended to \fIlogs/feedback.jsonl\fR.
.TP
.B toggle voice
Enable or disable the voice gateway at runtime.
.TP
.B man
Open this man page.
.TP
.B help
Show the command overview.
.TP
.B \-\-budget-status
Show the current API usage budget and remaining tokens.
.SH ERS NATURAL LANGUAGE INTENTS
Jarvis routes plain English input to specific ERS chains:
.TP
.I 'research ...'
\fCresearch_deep.yaml\fR \(em extensive web and local analysis.
.TP
.I 'summarize git ...'
\fCgit_summarize.yaml\fR \(em generate a human-readable changelog.
.TP
.I 'validate nixos ...'
\fCnixos_verify.yaml\fR \(em check NixOS configuration sanity with local models.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP "\fBJARVIS_ROOT\fR"
Override the default project directory (default: \fI~/NixOSenv/Jarvis\fR).
.IP "\fBVAULT_ROOT\fR"
Override the secure data storage root (default: \fI/THE_VAULT/jarvis\fR).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/jarvis/user_prefs.toml
Persistent user preferences (models, services, etc.).
.TP
.I ~/.config/jarvis/context/session_prefs.json
Session-scoped preference overrides (cleared on new session).
.TP
.I /THE_VAULT/jarvis/databases/security_audit.db
Central audit trail and pending grant storage.
.TP
.I /THE_VAULT/jarvis/databases/knowledge.db
RAG knowledge base and embeddings.
.TP
.I ~/NixOSenv/modules/jarvis.nix
Declarative NixOS service definitions (NixOS only). Edit here to add/change services, then run \fCsudo nixos-rebuild switch\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/
Systemd user unit files (non-NixOS). Installed by \fCmake install-services\fR; drop-in overrides placed by \fBjarvis service config\fR.
.TP
.I <JARVIS_ROOT>/services/templates/
Portable systemd service/timer templates. Contain \fC__PLACEHOLDER__\fR variables substituted at install time.
.SH PLATFORM DIFFERENCES (NixOS vs Traditional Linux)
.TS
tab(|) allbox;
l l l.
Operation|NixOS|Traditional Linux
Install services|Edit modules/jarvis.nix|make install-services
Enable auto-start|Declared in jarvis.nix|make install-services-enable
Modify unit files|Edit jarvis.nix + nixos-rebuild|Drop-in in ~/.config/systemd/user/
Apply changes|sudo nixos-rebuild switch|systemctl --user daemon-reload
Runtime control|jarvis start/stop/restart|jarvis start/stop/restart
.TE
.SH SECURITY PROTOCOL
Capabilities (e.g., \fCfile_read\fR, \fCshell_exec\fR) are requested dynamically. If not auto-granted:
.IP 1.
The process raises \fCCapabilityPending\fR.
.IP 2.
The user is notified via CLI (Interactive) or long-polling (OOB).
.IP 3.
The task pauses until \fBjarvis approve\fR is executed.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ollama (1),
.BR nix (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Created by Antigravity AI for the Jarvis Project.
